So welcome back, guys.
Now, next, let us discuss the memory layout of our Linux process.
So memory let out of a process is a diagrammatic representation of the processes, memory, layout and
Linux or Unix operating system.
Memory layout of a process helps us to understand that whole process.
Whelchel memory works during the course of execution of a process.
So therefore it is important for us to understand that how memory of a Linux process is organized by
the operating system so that we can understand the advanced concepts that we were going to discuss in
this module.
So let us see that how memory layout of a process looks like for a Linux process.
Now note that the discussion that we are doing is specific to Linux or Unix like operating system.
If you talk about a process that is running on the Windows operating system, then the memory out of
a process on Windows machine could be entirely different than what we were going to discuss here.
So you can see that on the left hand side, I have drawn some beautiful diagram.
So this is actually the layout of a typical Linux process.
You can see that means that higher address and elements laboratories.
Right.
So lower.
That just means, for example, let us say that the lower address is six.
So the higher address could be 160.
So the addresses decreases downwards, right.
So this diagram actually represents the entire Whelchel address space of our system, as you can see
that this diagram represents the entire virtual memory.
So the Linux process, when it starts its execution, the Linux process, assumes that the entire virtual
address, a space of a system, is available for its use.
Now you can see that this virtual address space is actually fragmented into different parts.
For example, the bottommost part is called the code than the initialized data, than initialized data.
Then comes the HEB segment.
Then there is no man's land region.
That is, it is the amount of virtual memory which is available to be used by the process.
And then you can see that it is a static memory which is there at the top of multilateralists space.
And very top of the world to that space is dedicated to command line arguments.
So now let us discuss that exactly what type of data each of these fragment of the virtual addresses
space actually stores.
So please remember that we are discussing this virtual space in the context of a given process be so
let us say that you have a process B and it is executing on the machine.
So now let us discuss that in the context of this process, be what is the data that will be stored
in these different different fragments of this virtual address, the space.
So let us start with the code section, you can see that code section is a memory which is dedicated
to store the compile process assembly code in the text format.
So when you compile a program, it generates an assembly code and after that next level of code that
is generated is the machine code.
Right.
So it does this assembly code, which is stored in this code section of this, which will address the
space.
So assembly code is the lowest level code, which is understandable by human being once the code is
translated into machine code.
Then this machine code is only understood by the processor or CPU and it does not understandable by
the human being.
So it is this assembly code which is eventually saved in the code section of this virtual memory of
a process that the next fragment is the initialized data.
So it is a part of virtual memory, of a process which distorts the process, initialized global and
static variables.
Right.
So when you write a program, you must have declared certain global variables.
And there is a condition that those global variables must be initialized with some value.
Similarly, you can have static variables and static variables should be initialized with some value.
Now, remember, these are static variables, maybe global.
That is, they are not declared inside any function or these are static variable could be local.
That is, they are declared inside a particular function.
So static variable, it doesn't matter whether they are global or local to some function, as long as
you initialize the static variables, these are static variables will be saved in the initialized data
fragment of this virtual memory.
Global variables, on the other hand, are the variables which are declared outside the function.
And if they are initialized by the programmer, then they are given the space in the initialized data
fragment of this virtual memory.
So don't worry, people are going to understand this with the help of an example.
Then the term memory region of this rochell address space is a memory which is called an initialized
data segment.
It is also abbreviated as best.
Now it's a homework for you to Google and find the full form of BBSes.
So initialise data is a family fragment which distorts the process and initialised global and static
variables, ripe fixed memory means that you cannot actually define more global variables or static
variables during the time of a process.
Right.
It is something that you do while writing a program.
The fourth fragment or region of this virtual family is the reason, so all that dynamic memory allocation
is actually dedicated to this hip region.
So you must have written a C program and you must have created a dynamic memory using Mallock or Kalac
system calls.
So all the memory that your process requests during runtime from the operating system is called dynamic
memory, and all that dynamic memory is actually allocated to this prison.
So when you process requests more and more of dynamic memory from the operating system, this hip region
actually expands and grows towards the top of this virtual memory space.
So not that this happens and grows from lower addressed towards higher address.
Right.
And then this big portion, you can see that it is a no man's land.
It means that this region represents the total system, available memory that he needs and expands or
shrinks when the process mallock of the memory.
Right.
So, as I said, if we have process request more and more dynamic memory from the operating system,
it is this portion of this virtual memory that will be used up by the process.
Then comes the stock portion of this virtual memory, so that stock memory is the memory that is assigned
for process execution, it cannot grow beyond a certain limit.
So you can see that this line is a barrier.
It means that the stock memory cannot grow beyond this barrier.
Otherwise, what will happen?
The heap memory on a stock memory can collapse.
So the Linux operating system has put an upper limit on that stack memory beyond which that stock memory
cannot grow.
So what are the contents of the stack memory for a process, which is an execution that stack memory
is used to store all the local variables of all the functions that has been stacked on top of the other.
For example, you have a function run.
It calls the function to and it calls the function three.
Right.
So each of these functions would have their own local variables.
So all those local variables will be stored in the stack memory.
Similarly, each of these functions will have their own arguments past.
So all of these arguments will also be saved in this stack memory.
Right.
And then there is a concept of return address and corners infl, which will also be saved in this stack
memory.
So we're going to discuss in detail that exactly what is stored in the stack memory when the process
executes.
So here the take of it is that that that stack memory is used to store certain data whenever the function
one makes a call to the function to.
In other words, we say that stack memory is a memory which actually makes the execution of a program
possible.
And then finally.
You can see that at the top we have come on line arguments, so the money that is allocated to the command
line arguments when you run your program is the mamady which is assigned from the highest address of
this virtual memory space.
So you can see that when your program startup's execution by default, it be supplied with two arguments.
That is IRGC and RGV.
Right.
So these are the arguments of the main function.
So the memory space to these arguments is assigned to the top of the at the top of this trilateral space.
So now I have explained this virtual memory lay out for A given process B and in the context of the
process B, now you understand that what are the different fragments of this virtual memory are and
what those fragments actually stores?
Now, let us take one small example to illustrate the point that we have discussed in this slight.